# Dissentangling-climate-and-parental-effects-on-recruitment-of-southern-stock-of-European-hake

# Overview

Recruitment levels serve as key indicators of stock health, productivity, and resilience, and thus are critical for effective stock assessment and sustainable fisheries management. Its dynamics are shaped by both external environmental conditions and internal biological factors, such as parental effects and density-dependent processes. Among these, parental attributes—interacting with environmental drivers—play a critical role in influencing recruitment and may serve as valuable indicators of stock status under the Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD) (Descriptor 3). The southern stock of European hake (Merluccius merluccius) is one of the most commercially valuable fish species in Europe, yet its recruitment has shown notable fluctuations in recent decades. This stock exhibits a protracted spawning season with two main spawning peaks (winter and spring–summer), however the relative contribution of each peak to overall reproductive success remains unclear, as do the parental traits associated with these distinct seasonal reproductive units. 

This study investigates the influence of environmental variables —sea surface temperature (SST), the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), and the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO)— alongside with spawning stock biomass (as a proxy for density dependence) and parental effects (size at first maturity by sex and the length structure of the spawning stock) on recruitment dynamics of the southern stock of European hake (female population) in the Iberian Atlantic waters (ICES division 27. 8.c. and 9.a.), over the last few decades (from 1980 to 2024). The primary objective is to identify novel indicators of the stock health by evaluating seasonal effects of parental traits on recruitment dynamics, for which it is necessary to disentangle parental influences from environmental drivers. Annual variability in recruitment (R) was modelled using Generalized Additive Model (GAM), with environmental and biological variables included as explanatory predictors. Additionally, we investigate the potential of the Shannon diversity index (H') as an indicator of the state of the southern hake population. 

# Materials and methods

Environmental time series were obtained from publicly available databases maintained by the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and processed using R software. AMO and NAO annual-times series were downloaded from the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA, http://www.noaa.gov/). SST annual averages covering the entire study period and sampling area were extracted from the NOAA NCDC platform (https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oisst). Data on Spawning Stock Biomass (SSB) and Recruitment (R) of southern European hake (in tonnes and thousands of individuals, respectively) were obtained from assessments by the ICES Working Group on Biological and Environmental Parameters (WGBIE (section 10), ICES 2024). Maturity data were obtained from the Spanish Oceanographic Institute´s (IEO) commercial sampling datasets, and numbers-at-length by sex and season were processed from the Stock Synthesis (SS) datasets. Female length at 50% maturity (L50) was estimated using the gonad_mature function from the SizeMat R package (Torrejón-Magallanes, 2020). The Shannon diversity index (H′) of the female length structure was calculated using the diversity function from the vegan package in R.

Generalized Additive Models (GAMs) were fitted assuming a Gaussian distribution, initially considering as predictor variables environmental factors ( SST, AMO, NAO) and biological factors (SSB, and female Shannon index and L50), according to the following model:

Rt=s(SSBt)+s(shannon_females_seasonXt)+s(L50_femalest)+s(SSTt)+s(AMOt)+s(NAOt)+εt

, where Rt is the recruitment in year t, s() are smooth functions (splines) estimated by the Generalized Additive Model (GAM), SSTt is the Sea Surface Temperature, AMOt is the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation, NAOt is the North Atlantic Oscillation, Shannon_females_seasonXt is the Shannon diversity index of female length structure by season (1-4), L50_females is the mean females length at first maturity, and εt is the random error term. 
where Rt is the recruitment in year t, s() are smooth functions (splines) estimated by the Generalized Additive Model (GAM), SSTt is the Sea Surface Temperature, AMOt is the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation, NAOt is the North Atlantic Oscillation, Shannon_females_seasonXt is the Shannon diversity index of female length structure by season (1-4), L50_females is the mean females length at first maturity, and εt is the random error term. 

Data exploration was carried out following the protocol described in Zuur, Ieno & Elphick (2010) to identify any outliers and any correlation and collinearity between explicative variables. Correlations were examined using Spearman's rank correlation test with the corrplot (Friendly, 2002) and GGally::ggpairs (Schloerke et al., 2021) functions in R. To asses multicollinearity between the predictor variables, the VIFs (Variance Inflation Factors) were calculated with the vif function of the package car (Fox and Weisberg 2019). Due to high correlation (r > 0.60) between SST and AMO, both variables were excluded from the final model. Similarly, due to high collinearity (VIF > 5) among the seasonal Shannon indices, seasons 2 and 4 were omitted from the model. Covariables in the final model were selected with a forward stepwise procedure based on the Akaike information criterion (AIC) and an adjusted R-square. The best (and most parsimonious) model was finally chosen based on the compromise between low AIC values, a high adjusted R-square and significant predictors.

In this case, GAMs were fitted using cubic regression splines as the basis for the explanatory variables, and REML as the method for parameter estimation. The basis dimension was restricted to a k=4 to allow sufficient flexibility while avoiding overfitting problems. When a spline was not required (edf=1), the variable was considered a linear effect. For each final GAM, a diagnosis of the model assumptions was carried out, among  which the independence of the residuals was verified using the auto-correlation (ACF) and partial autocorrelation (PACF) functions and the Ljung-Box test (Wood 2006). When Ljung-Box test indicated a potential temporal trend, the auto.arima() function from the forecast package (Hyndman et al., 2019) was used to check for any temporal structure in the model residuals. The best-fitting model was an ARMA (0,0,0) with zero mean, suggesting that the residuals do not exhibit any structured temporal pattern and can be considered white noise. Additionally, results of Jarque-Bera and Shapiro-Wilk tests (normality assumption), a Dickye-Fuller test (stationarity assumption) and a Student t-test (zero mean assumption) were also explored. The GAMs were performed using the function gam of the mgcv package (Wood 2011) of the R software

The final model for recruitment(R) was specified as:

Rt=SSBt+L50_femalest+s(shannon_females_season1t)+s(shannon_females_season3t)+s(NAOt)+εt 
